README.md, before:

## MULLS: Versatile LiDAR SLAM via Multi-metric Linear Least Square 

This repository implements MULLS, an efficient, low-drift, and versatile LiDAR-only SLAM system with both the front-end and back-end.  It's an overall updated version of [LLS-LOAM](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/LLS-LOAM). 

#### [[Demo Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=85bGD55e3-0&feature=youtu.be)] [[Preprint Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.03771)] [[Project Wiki](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/MULLS/wiki)]

**Version 1.1**

*(tested on Ubuntu 16.04 / 18.04 / 20.04)*

Codes are currently under refactoring for better readability and performance.

------

### MULLS SLAM demo


<p align="left">
<img src="./assets/mulls_slam_demo.gif" width="600" alt="mulls_slam">
</p>

------

### MULLS Registration demo



<p align="left">
<img src="./assets/mulls_reg_demo.gif" width="600" alt="mulls_slam">
</p>

----------------

## Instruction

### 1. Install dependent 3rd libraries 

For a compiler that supports OpenMP

Compulsory:

- [PCL(>=1.7)](https://github.com/PointCloudLibrary/pcl)
- [Glog](https://github.com/google/glog)
- [Gflags](https://github.com/gflags/gflags)
- [Eigen 3](https://eigen.tuxfamily.org/dox/)

Optional:

- For *.las data IO: [LibLas](https://github.com/libLAS/libLAS)
- For *.h5 data IO: [HDF5](https://support.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/release/obtainsrc.html)
- For geo-coordinate projection for global mapping: [Proj4](https://proj.org/)
- For Lie-Group and Lie-Algebra related functions (only used in baseline registration method vgicp): [Sophus](https://github.com/strasdat/Sophus)
- For 2D map, scan range image and BEV image generation: [OpenCV](https://github.com/opencv/opencv) 
- For pose graph optimization: [g2o(<=2016version)](https://github.com/RainerKuemmerle/g2o/releases/tag/20160424_git)
- or [ceres](http://ceres-solver.org/)
- or [gtsam](https://bitbucket.org/gtborg/gtsam/src/develop/)
- For efficient global registration using truncated least square: [TEASER++](https://github.com/MIT-SPARK/TEASER-plusplus)

You may run the following shell file to install all the dependent libs (tested on Ubuntu 16.04):
```
sh script/tools/install_dep_lib.sh
```

Note: ceres, g2o and gtsam are all used for pose graph optimization. You only need to install one of them (ceres is recommended).

### 2. Compile

```
# cd to the base folder of MULLS
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make 
cd ..
```

If you'd like to configure the optional dependent libs needed by your task, you can directly switch the options in ```CMakeLists.txt``` and then rebuild or use ```ccmake ..``` in ```build``` folder instead. (If it does not work, you nned to delete the ```build``` folder and do ```2.Compile``` again). 

### 3. Minimum example

By using the example data (16 adjacent scans) in ```./demo_data```, you can have a quick test of MULLS-SLAM and MULLS-Registration.

Without editing anything, directly run 
```
sh script/run_mulls_slam.sh
```
and 
```
sh script/run_mulls_reg.sh
```
to check the results (in the real-time viewer and the ```result``` folder in ```demo_data```).


### 4. Prepare data

The input of MULLS should be a sequence of point cloud. Each point cloud is corresponding to a frame of the transaction.

##### Test on KITTI

Download the [KITTI Odometry Dataset](http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/eval_odometry.php) to test the project.

To test the semantic mask aided solution, please download the [Semantic KITTI Odometry Dataset](http://semantic-kitti.org/).

The complete data folder structure should be as following:

```
Base Folder
_____00
     |___velodyne [raw data *.bin]
     |___pcd [*.pcd] (can be generated from *.bin by run_kittibin2pcd.sh)
     |___labels [raw semantic label *.label] (optional for semantic aided lidar odometry) 
     |___label_pcd [*.pcd] (optional for semantic aided lidar odometry, can be generated from *.label and *.bin by run_semantic_kitti_labelbin2pcd.sh) 
     |___00.txt [ground truth (gnssins) pose] (optional for evaluation)
     |___calib.txt [extrinsic transformation matrix (from body to lidar coordinate system)] (optional for evaluation)
     |___result [output of MULLS: generated map, pose and evaluation] (would be generated automatically after the transaction) 
_____01
     |___velodyne
     |___pcd
     |___labels
     |...
_____...
   
```

Scripts for converting the data format are available in ```./script/tool/``` folder.

You can use ```script/tools/run_kittibin2pcd.sh ``` to convert ```*.bin``` to ```*.pcd``` to get the ```pcd``` folder.
Similarly, you can use ```script/tools/run_semantic_kitti_labelbin2pcd.sh ``` to convert ```*.label``` to ```*.pcd``` to get the ```label_pcd``` folder.

##### Test on your own data

If you'd like to use your own data, the data format should be one of the following: `*.pcd`, `*.ply`, `*.txt`, `*.las`, `*.csv`, `*.h5`, `*.bin`.
You can simply specify the data format in ```script/run_mulls_slam.sh```.

The data foler structure can be as simple as follows:

```
Base Folder
      |___dummy_framewise_point_cloud
      .    |___00001.pcd (las,txt,ply,h5,csv,bin...)
      .    |___00002.pcd (las,txt,ply,h5,csv,bin...)
      .    |___...
      |___dummy_ground_truth_trajectory.txt (optional)   
      |___dummy_calibration_file.txt (optional)  
```
To feed your data into MULLS in order, your point clouds' filename should also in the same order. You can use ```script/tools/batch_rename.sh ``` to rename filenames from something like ```1.pcd``` to ```00001.pcd``` in batch.

Links to more open datasets are available [here](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/MULLS/wiki/Open-datasets). 

### 5. Run

#### MULLS-SLAM

If you'd like to test the LiDAR SLAM module (MULLS-SLAM), please edit the ```script/run_mulls_slam.sh``` file, specify the data path and then run:

```
sh script/run_mulls_slam.sh
```

If the visualization is enabled, then you can configure the visualization GUI by following the instructions [here](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/MULLS/wiki/GUI-instruction).

For better performance on a specific dataset, you are suggested to play with the parameters in ```script/config/lo_gflag_list_[xxx].txt``` (tips on parameter tuning are available [here](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/MULLS/wiki/MULLS-SLAM-Parameter-List)), and then you need to change the config file path in ```script/run_mulls_slam.sh``` as follows:

```
config_file=./script/config/lo_gflag_list_[xxx].txt
```

To disable or enable the back-end (loop closure detection and pose graph optimization), you can edit the ```--loop_closure_detection_on=true/false``` in the config file.

After the transaction, you are expected to find the results (plots, poses, evaluation results, generated 3D and 2D map ...) in the ```result``` folder under the data path. You can configure the output preference according to [here](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/MULLS/wiki/MULLS-Visualization-Parameter-List).

#### MULLS-Registration

You can use ```script/run_mulls_reg.sh``` to test the pairwise point cloud registration using MULLS-ICP with TEASER++ simply by configuring the data path in it. Then you can run it by:

```
sh script/run_mulls_reg.sh
```

An example on TLS point cloud registration can be found [here](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/MULLS/wiki/Case-study:-example-on-TLS-point-cloud-registration).

----------

### More demos

------

#### On KITTI dataset (seq. 00 & 01)

<img src="assets/kitti_00_show.jpg" alt="alt text" style="zoom:80%;">

<img src="assets/kitti_01_show.jpg" alt="alt text" style="zoom:80%;">

----------------------------

### Citation

If you find this code useful for your work or use it in your project, please consider citing the [paper](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9561364):

```
@inproceedings{pan2021mulls,
  title={MULLS: Versatile LiDAR SLAM via Multi-metric Linear Least Square},
  author={Yue Pan, Pengchuan Xiao, Yujie He, Zhenlei Shao, Zesong Li},
  booktitle={IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)},
  year={2021},
  organization={IEEE}
}
```
---------

### Contact

If you have any questions, please let me know:

- Yue Pan {[yuepan@ethz.ch]()}

--------

### Acknowledgments

We thank the authors of [TEASER](https://github.com/MIT-SPARK/TEASER-plusplus) and [NDT_OMP](https://github.com/koide3/ndt_omp) for making their work public.

Thanks Martin Valgur @[valgur](https://github.com/valgur) for fixing the compatibility issues.

------


### TODO List

- [x] Add preprint paper
- [x] Add Wiki
- [x] Add demo examples
- [x] Update camera-ready paper
- [ ] Code refactoring
- [ ] Add ROS support
- [ ] Add cross-platform support (run on windows)
- [ ] Add sensor fusion module
- [ ] Add localization module with built map

-----

Commit message:

Added how to run the docker container to readme

README.md, after:

## MULLS: Versatile LiDAR SLAM via Multi-metric Linear Least Square 

This repository implements MULLS, an efficient, low-drift, and versatile LiDAR-only SLAM system with both the front-end and back-end.  It's an overall updated version of [LLS-LOAM](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/LLS-LOAM). 

#### [[Demo Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=85bGD55e3-0&feature=youtu.be)] [[Preprint Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.03771)] [[Project Wiki](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/MULLS/wiki)]

**Version 1.1**

*(tested on Ubuntu 16.04 / 18.04 / 20.04)*

Codes are currently under refactoring for better readability and performance.

------

### Alex - Run the docker container with your data

Place your pcd data inside the dem_data/pcd with ascending numbers as names

Run this command inside the MULLS folder:
```
docker build -t mulls:latest .
```
Run this command inside the MULLS folder:
```
docker run mulls:latest 
```

You can find the results like the computed poses inside the docker container in the mulls/demo_data/result folder.

### MULLS SLAM demo


<p align="left">
<img src="./assets/mulls_slam_demo.gif" width="600" alt="mulls_slam">
</p>

------

### MULLS Registration demo



<p align="left">
<img src="./assets/mulls_reg_demo.gif" width="600" alt="mulls_slam">
</p>

----------------

## Instruction

### 1. Install dependent 3rd libraries 

For a compiler that supports OpenMP

Compulsory:

- [PCL(>=1.7)](https://github.com/PointCloudLibrary/pcl)
- [Glog](https://github.com/google/glog)
- [Gflags](https://github.com/gflags/gflags)
- [Eigen 3](https://eigen.tuxfamily.org/dox/)

Optional:

- For *.las data IO: [LibLas](https://github.com/libLAS/libLAS)
- For *.h5 data IO: [HDF5](https://support.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/release/obtainsrc.html)
- For geo-coordinate projection for global mapping: [Proj4](https://proj.org/)
- For Lie-Group and Lie-Algebra related functions (only used in baseline registration method vgicp): [Sophus](https://github.com/strasdat/Sophus)
- For 2D map, scan range image and BEV image generation: [OpenCV](https://github.com/opencv/opencv) 
- For pose graph optimization: [g2o(<=2016version)](https://github.com/RainerKuemmerle/g2o/releases/tag/20160424_git)
- or [ceres](http://ceres-solver.org/)
- or [gtsam](https://bitbucket.org/gtborg/gtsam/src/develop/)
- For efficient global registration using truncated least square: [TEASER++](https://github.com/MIT-SPARK/TEASER-plusplus)

You may run the following shell file to install all the dependent libs (tested on Ubuntu 16.04):
```
sh script/tools/install_dep_lib.sh
```

Note: ceres, g2o and gtsam are all used for pose graph optimization. You only need to install one of them (ceres is recommended).

### 2. Compile

```
# cd to the base folder of MULLS
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make 
cd ..
```

If you'd like to configure the optional dependent libs needed by your task, you can directly switch the options in ```CMakeLists.txt``` and then rebuild or use ```ccmake ..``` in ```build``` folder instead. (If it does not work, you nned to delete the ```build``` folder and do ```2.Compile``` again). 

### 3. Minimum example

By using the example data (16 adjacent scans) in ```./demo_data```, you can have a quick test of MULLS-SLAM and MULLS-Registration.

Without editing anything, directly run 
```
sh script/run_mulls_slam.sh
```
and 
```
sh script/run_mulls_reg.sh
```
to check the results (in the real-time viewer and the ```result``` folder in ```demo_data```).


### 4. Prepare data

The input of MULLS should be a sequence of point cloud. Each point cloud is corresponding to a frame of the transaction.

##### Test on KITTI

Download the [KITTI Odometry Dataset](http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/eval_odometry.php) to test the project.

To test the semantic mask aided solution, please download the [Semantic KITTI Odometry Dataset](http://semantic-kitti.org/).

The complete data folder structure should be as following:

```
Base Folder
_____00
     |___velodyne [raw data *.bin]
     |___pcd [*.pcd] (can be generated from *.bin by run_kittibin2pcd.sh)
     |___labels [raw semantic label *.label] (optional for semantic aided lidar odometry) 
     |___label_pcd [*.pcd] (optional for semantic aided lidar odometry, can be generated from *.label and *.bin by run_semantic_kitti_labelbin2pcd.sh) 
     |___00.txt [ground truth (gnssins) pose] (optional for evaluation)
     |___calib.txt [extrinsic transformation matrix (from body to lidar coordinate system)] (optional for evaluation)
     |___result [output of MULLS: generated map, pose and evaluation] (would be generated automatically after the transaction) 
_____01
     |___velodyne
     |___pcd
     |___labels
     |...
_____...
   
```

Scripts for converting the data format are available in ```./script/tool/``` folder.

You can use ```script/tools/run_kittibin2pcd.sh ``` to convert ```*.bin``` to ```*.pcd``` to get the ```pcd``` folder.
Similarly, you can use ```script/tools/run_semantic_kitti_labelbin2pcd.sh ``` to convert ```*.label``` to ```*.pcd``` to get the ```label_pcd``` folder.

##### Test on your own data

If you'd like to use your own data, the data format should be one of the following: `*.pcd`, `*.ply`, `*.txt`, `*.las`, `*.csv`, `*.h5`, `*.bin`.
You can simply specify the data format in ```script/run_mulls_slam.sh```.

The data foler structure can be as simple as follows:

```
Base Folder
      |___dummy_framewise_point_cloud
      .    |___00001.pcd (las,txt,ply,h5,csv,bin...)
      .    |___00002.pcd (las,txt,ply,h5,csv,bin...)
      .    |___...
      |___dummy_ground_truth_trajectory.txt (optional)   
      |___dummy_calibration_file.txt (optional)  
```
To feed your data into MULLS in order, your point clouds' filename should also in the same order. You can use ```script/tools/batch_rename.sh ``` to rename filenames from something like ```1.pcd``` to ```00001.pcd``` in batch.

Links to more open datasets are available [here](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/MULLS/wiki/Open-datasets). 

### 5. Run

#### MULLS-SLAM

If you'd like to test the LiDAR SLAM module (MULLS-SLAM), please edit the ```script/run_mulls_slam.sh``` file, specify the data path and then run:

```
sh script/run_mulls_slam.sh
```

If the visualization is enabled, then you can configure the visualization GUI by following the instructions [here](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/MULLS/wiki/GUI-instruction).

For better performance on a specific dataset, you are suggested to play with the parameters in ```script/config/lo_gflag_list_[xxx].txt``` (tips on parameter tuning are available [here](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/MULLS/wiki/MULLS-SLAM-Parameter-List)), and then you need to change the config file path in ```script/run_mulls_slam.sh``` as follows:

```
config_file=./script/config/lo_gflag_list_[xxx].txt
```

To disable or enable the back-end (loop closure detection and pose graph optimization), you can edit the ```--loop_closure_detection_on=true/false``` in the config file.

After the transaction, you are expected to find the results (plots, poses, evaluation results, generated 3D and 2D map ...) in the ```result``` folder under the data path. You can configure the output preference according to [here](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/MULLS/wiki/MULLS-Visualization-Parameter-List).

#### MULLS-Registration

You can use ```script/run_mulls_reg.sh``` to test the pairwise point cloud registration using MULLS-ICP with TEASER++ simply by configuring the data path in it. Then you can run it by:

```
sh script/run_mulls_reg.sh
```

An example on TLS point cloud registration can be found [here](https://github.com/YuePanEdward/MULLS/wiki/Case-study:-example-on-TLS-point-cloud-registration).

----------

### More demos

------

#### On KITTI dataset (seq. 00 & 01)

<img src="assets/kitti_00_show.jpg" alt="alt text" style="zoom:80%;">

<img src="assets/kitti_01_show.jpg" alt="alt text" style="zoom:80%;">

----------------------------

### Citation

If you find this code useful for your work or use it in your project, please consider citing the [paper](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9561364):

```
@inproceedings{pan2021mulls,
  title={MULLS: Versatile LiDAR SLAM via Multi-metric Linear Least Square},
  author={Yue Pan, Pengchuan Xiao, Yujie He, Zhenlei Shao, Zesong Li},
  booktitle={IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)},
  year={2021},
  organization={IEEE}
}
```
---------

### Contact

If you have any questions, please let me know:

- Yue Pan {[yuepan@ethz.ch]()}

--------

### Acknowledgments

We thank the authors of [TEASER](https://github.com/MIT-SPARK/TEASER-plusplus) and [NDT_OMP](https://github.com/koide3/ndt_omp) for making their work public.

Thanks Martin Valgur @[valgur](https://github.com/valgur) for fixing the compatibility issues.

------


### TODO List

- [x] Add preprint paper
- [x] Add Wiki
- [x] Add demo examples
- [x] Update camera-ready paper
- [ ] Code refactoring
- [ ] Add ROS support
- [ ] Add cross-platform support (run on windows)
- [ ] Add sensor fusion module
- [ ] Add localization module with built map

-----
